On the subject of totalitarianism, um
I wanted to do something very quickly, so
I'm guessing that even though most people in the room have negative views of both men
They have a more intensely negative view of Hitler than of Stalin
I'm guessing almost everyone in the room has a far more negative visceral reaction to the swastika than to the hammer and sickle
Some of the protestors at your event at Macmaster University stood behind a banner with a hammer and sickle.
You've said that a hammer and sickle is no funnier than a swastika.
That, quote, "The reprehensible ideologies that are based in fundamental Marxism killed at least 100 million people in the 20th century."
I've discussed this proposition with numerous people in recent months, and almost no one seems to buy it.
No one disputes the body count under socialist regimes. Few dispute that Stalin was a vicious murderer, roughly on par with Hitler in moral terms.
In other words they share your critique of
the argument that previous communist
experiments did not represent proper
communism and that proper communism
should be tried nevertheless they still
disagree with you that we should react
as negatively to the hammer and sickle
as we do to the swastika. why? because
they say the two ideologies are not
morally comparable National Socialism is
much worse morally than Marxism or
Marxism Leninism so what do you say to
this
well I would say the first thing is
that it's highly probable that you were
talking to intellectuals
students
well
we'll call them budding intellectuals
it's it is a it is a mystery you know
it's a it's a it is a mystery because it
is the case that there is something
about the Nazi doctrine that seems to
have a visceral impact that that the
Communist doctrine doesn't have. And, I
said when I opened my room remarks
tonight that it might be the issue of
racial superiority, you know, it's it's
something single that you can put your
finger on, whereas what's happening on
the left that's horrifying is murky it
might even be multi-dimensional, like
maybe there isn't a single radical
leftist idea that's murderous like the
racial superiority doctrine. Maybe it's a
combination of three or maybe at some
set of four out of ten who knows so and
because of that it doesn't seem as
repugnant, and there was also a
universalizing tendency among the
communists that seemed to be less
morally reprehensible than the
ethno-nationalism of the Nazi's so you
know you think if you go back to 1914
it's complicated but if you go back to
say 1918 at the time of the Russian
Revolution it's not like the Communists
knew that their attempts to bring about
the socialist utopia would be doomed to
absolute murderous catastrophe, right?
They were they were working in in
ignorance. Now, it's not that simple
because by that time Dostoevsky had
already written "'The Devils" ("The
Possessed") and he outlined very, very
clearly what he thought would happen if
people like that got the reins of power
and Nietzsche had done the same thing in
his writing. So, people knew that there
was something 'toxic' let's say and deadly
about the doctrine but it hadn't been
played out on the world stage, but now,
it's like, 'well this is why I said what I
said at the beginning', fine. You know, if... I
don't know exactly how to make the moral
distinction, but it's a distinction that
has to be made. I think that people who
apologize, who say something, like I think,
I think that it's virtually, I don't know if
it's as reprehensible to say that a
given ethnic group should be consigned
to the fire and to say 'that wasn't real
communism', but they're damn close. And
when I hear someone say that wasn't real
communism I know what they mean what
they mean was "if I was the dictator in
Stalin's shoes, I personally would have
brought in the Utopia." That's what that
statement means... and, or it means an
ignorance of history that's so utterly
appalling that, that any political
statement made on behalf of that person
whatsoever should immediately be
followed by a paroxysm of extreme embarrassment.
May I say one... I just want to be clear that these students were conceding
that they don't agree,
that they share your critique...
They don't share it enough.
Okay, fair enough *audience laughter*
I just wanted to make that clear
so they would more or less agree with
what you just said I think about it's
not okay to say those regimes weren't
proper communism and the proper
communism should be tried they still
dispute though that socialism as an
ideology is on par with Nazism. So, I just
wanted to make that clear
"Well, we could say communism,
let's say we could say radical
leftist ideology as I said already there
are reasons for the left and the right
wing right the right wing stands for
hierarchy and the left wing stands for
the for those who are displaced by
hierarchy right an endless problem but
that doesn't mean that still leaves it
in the camp of the people speaking on
behalf of egalitarianism to figure out
just what the hell went wrong and to
take some responsibility for it you know
it's no joke and we see these things
play out continually still look at what
happened to Venezuela here's a fun story
do you know that it is now illegal for
physicians to list starvation as
the cause of death for a Venezuelan
child in a hospital that's how they're
dealing with the
fact of starvation right you just make
it illegal to have that diagnosed as
your cause of death that'll solve the
problem it's like you know we have a
group of of well-meaning
socialists in Canada who just produced
something called the leap manifesto a
couple of years ago and it's a pretty
radical document
they're trying to move our Socialist
Party the NDP new democratic party
towards the acceptance of this leap
manifesto which doesn't look like it's
going to happen but they were all
radical promoters of the Venezuelan
government before everything went like
badly sideways you know I think the
average Venezuelan now has lost 17
pounds that's not because they were put
on a voluntary dieting program right
it's not good and so if you're tilting
towards the left and you're
temperamentally inclined that way and
half the population is then you have an
ethical problem on your on your hands
which is how do you segregate yourself
from the radical policies that produced
the catastrophes of the 20th century and
you can't just say well that's not my
problem it's like well okay if it's not
your problem now it certainly might
become your problem in the future
so and I would say it's actually
everybody's problem in the aftermath of
the 20th century it's everybody's
problem so it's
complicated like there is a genuine
desire like I worked for a Socialist
Party for quite a while when I was a kid
you know when I saw both sides of it I
saw some very very admirable people I
was privy for for a variety of chance
reasons to the leadership of the
Socialist Party in Canada at the
provincial and the national level. I met the
people who ran the provinces some of the
provinces and who ran the party and a lot
of them were really admirable people
like they'd spent their whole life I
would say working on behalf of the
working class you know so they were
genuine labor leaders and
there was also a lot done in Canada on
the left that looks like it was actually
pretty good
standard work week the income you know
that the establishment of pensions the
introduction of our health care system
which
I would say probably overall works
better than the American system although
not at the upper end and they were
working hard on behalf of people who had
working-class lives but then I also
encountered the sort of low-level
activist types and I didn't have any
respect for them at all I just thought
they were peavish and resentful and
irritable and those two things
exist in a very uneasy coalition on the
west there's care for the poor and
hatred for the successful and those two
things aren't the same at all and it
looks to me like one of the things that
really happened when the Communist
doctrines were brought into play and it
also by the way we did the multinational
experiment right it doesn't matter where
you put these policies into play the
same bloody outcome occurred didn't
matter whether it was Russia or China or
Cambodia or Vietnam or to pick a random
African country or Cuba or Venezuela for
that matter it was an unmitigated
catastrophe and so to me that's
experiment plus replication enough
enough well that has to be dealt with
and it's not an delay that intellectual
left in the West has been absolutely
appalling in their silence on the
communist catastrophe like for my
students a lot of my students really
haven't heard about anything that
happened in the Soviet Union in any
detail until they take my personality
class in the second year of university
it's like well what the hell why are
they learning about that in a
personality class in the second year of
university that's not that should be
first and foremost in in their in their
historical knowledge what happened in
the twentieth century I mean it was
almost fatal what happened and we still
haven't completely recovered from it
right I think isn't your President
Donald Trump going to talk to like
insane totalitarian number one sometime
here in the near future but that's still
a soviet-era state those people are
armed to the teeth you know they have
the weapon they they have weaponry that
could easily take you out and so we're
not I don't know if you know do you know
what happens if you blast a single
hydrogen bomb 100 miles above the United
States just one you lose all your
electronics right they're all done
tractors cars trains subways computers
phones all of them burn out and that's
it so we're not done with this yet and
and the Korean State North Korea as an
emblematic representative of the
communist catastrophe and everyone there
starves there's millions of people died
20 years ago is had not got any better
so it's not like it's not like we solved
this problem and there's a deafening
silence on the intellectual side of the
spectrum with regards to what happened
on the egalitarian left and there's no
excuse for it so